feat(lifecycle-operator): automatically decide for scheduler installation based on k8s version (#2212)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/content/en/docs/architecture/components/scheduler/_index.md

---
title: Keptn integration with Scheduling
linktitle: Scheduler and Scheduling Gates
description: Basic understanding of how Keptn integrates with Kubernetes Pod Scheduling
weight: 80
cascade:
---

Keptn needs to integrate with Kubernetes scheduling to block
the deployment of applications that do not satisfy Keptn defined pre-deployment checks.

On Kubernetes versions older and including 1.26, Keptn uses a Scheduler to block applications deployment.
The **Keptn Scheduler** is an integral component of Keptn that orchestrates
the deployment process.

> If you set Keptn helm chart value `schedulingGatesEnabled` to `true`, and you do have a K8s version greater than 1.26,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Keptn helm chart value `schedulingGatesEnabled` is set to to `true`, and Keptn is running on a Kubernetes version greater than 1.26,
```

> Keptn will not install a scheduler plugin, but it will use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keptn does not install a scheduler plugin.
Instead, it uses
```

---
title: Keptn integration with Scheduling
linktitle: Scheduler and Scheduling Gates
description: Basic understanding of how Keptn integrates with Kubernetes Pod Scheduling
weight: 80
cascade:
---

Keptn needs to integrate with Kubernetes scheduling to block
the deployment of applications that do not satisfy Keptn defined pre-deployment checks.

> On Kubernetes versions older and including 1.26, Keptn uses a Scheduler to block application deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Kubernetes versions 1.26 and older,
Keptn uses the **Keptn Scheduler** to block application deployment when appropriate
and orchestrate the deployment process.
```

> The **Keptn Scheduler** is an integral component of Keptn that orchestrates
> the deployment process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If the Keptn helm chart value `schedulingGatesEnabled` is set to to `true`, and Keptn is running on a Kubernetes version greater than 1.26,
Keptn does not install a scheduler plugin.
Instead, it uses
the [Pod Scheduling Readiness K8s API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-scheduling-readiness).

## Keptn Scheduling Gates for K8s 1.27 and above

When you apply a workload to a K8s cluster, the Mutating Webhook checks for annotations on Pods to
see if it is annotated with
[Keptn specific annotations](../../implementing/integrate/#basic-annotations).

> If the annotations are present, the Webhook adds a gate to the Pod called `keptn-prechecks-gate`,
> this is a spec that tells the Kubernetes scheduling framework to wait for Keptn's checks before assigning the pod to a
> node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the annotations are present, the Webhook adds a gate to the Pod called `keptn-prechecks-gate`.
This is a spec that tells the Kubernetes scheduling framework
to wait for  the Keptn checks before assigning the pod to a node.
```
You can't use `'s` on a trademarked term

> For instance a pod gated by keptn will look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance a pod gated by keptn looks like the following:
```

{{<embed path="/docs/assets/scheduler-gates/gated.yaml">}}

The **WorkloadInstance CRD** contains information about the `pre-deployment` checks that
need to be performed before the Pod can be scheduled.
If the `pre-deployment` checks have finished successfully, the WorkloadInstance Controller removes the gate from the
Pod.
The scheduler can then allow the Pod to be scheduled to a node.

> If the `pre-deployment` checks have not yet finished, the gate will stay and the Pod will remain pending.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `pre-deployment` checks have not yet finished, the gate stays and the Pod remains in the pending state.
```

> When removing the gate, the WorkloadInstance controller also adds the following annotation, so that if there is an
> update of the spec the Pod will not be gated again:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When removing the gate, the WorkloadInstance controller also adds the following annotation so that,
if the spec is updated,
the Pod is not gated again:
```

{{<embed path="/docs/assets/scheduler-gates/gate-removed.yaml">}}

> ## Keptn Scheduler for K8s 1.26 and lower

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Keptn Scheduler for K8s 1.26 and earlier
```

---
title: Keptn integration with Scheduling
linktitle: Scheduler and Scheduling Gates
description: Basic understanding of how Keptn integrates with Kubernetes Pod Scheduling
weight: 80
cascade:
---

Keptn needs to integrate with Kubernetes scheduling to block
the deployment of applications that do not satisfy Keptn defined pre-deployment checks.

On Kubernetes versions 1.26 and older,
Keptn uses the **Keptn Scheduler** to block application deployment when appropriate
and orchestrate the deployment process.

If the Keptn helm chart value `schedulingGatesEnabled` is set to `true`, and Keptn is running on a Kubernetes version
greater than 1.26, Keptn does not install a scheduler plugin.
Instead, it uses
the [Pod Scheduling Readiness K8s API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-scheduling-readiness) 

> to gate Pods until the required deployment checks pass.
> ## Keptn Scheduling Gates for K8s 1.27 and above

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to gate Pods until the required deployment checks pass.

## Keptn Scheduling Gates for K8s 1.27 and above
```

---
title: Keptn Lifecycle Scheduling
linktitle: Scheduler and Scheduling Gates
description: Basic understanding of the Keptn Scheduler
weight: 80
cascade:
---

Keptn needs to interfere on the Kuberetes scheduling to be able to block
the deployment of applications that do not satisfy Keptn defined pre-deployment checks.

> On Kubernetes versions older and including 1.26.0, Keptn uses a Scheduler to block applications deployment.

Reviewer 3: usually patch versions are not reported as far as I could see in other docs
```suggestion
On Kubernetes versions older and including 1.26, Keptn uses a Scheduler to block applications deployment.
```

The **Keptn Scheduler** is an integral component of Keptn that orchestrates
the deployment process.

> From Keptn v0.8.4 onward, if you do have a K8s version greater than 1.26.0, instead of a scheduler plugin,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From Keptn v0.8.4 onward, if you do have a K8s version greater than 1.26,
```

Keptn

> uses [K8s Pod Scheduling Readiness](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-scheduling-readiness).

Reviewer 3: not sure what reads better 🤔 
```suggestion
uses the [Pod Scheduling Readiness K8s API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-scheduling-readiness).
```

> ## Keptn Scheduling Gates for K8s 1.27.0 and above

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Keptn Scheduling Gates for K8s 1.27 and above
```

Firstly the Mutating Webhook checks for annotations on Pods to see if it is annotated with
[Keptn specific annotations](https://main.lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/implementing/integrate/#basic-annotations).

> If the annotations are present, the Webhook adds a gate to the Pod called "keptn-prechecks-gate", this is a spec that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the annotations are present, the Webhook adds a gate to the Pod called `keptn-prechecks-gate`, this is a spec that
```

> tells the
> default scheduler to wait.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
tells the Kubernetes scheduling framework to wait.

```

For instance a pod gated by keptn will look like the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pod
spec:
  schedulingGates:
    - name: "keptn-prechecks-gate"
  ...
```

The **WorkloadInstance CRD** contains information about the `pre-deployment` checks that
need to be performed before the Pod can be scheduled.
When the Workload Instance controller finishes these
pre-checks it will decide if the `pre-deployment` checks have finished successfully, to remove the gate from the Pod.

> The default scheduler can then allow the Pod to be scheduled to a node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The scheduler can then allow the Pod to be scheduled to a node.
```

If the `pre-deployment` checks have not yet finished, the gate will stay and the Pod will remain pending.

> When removing the gate, the WorkloadInstance controller alo adds the following annotation,

Reviewer 3: few lines above is with a space
```suggestion
When removing the gate, the Workload Instance controller also adds the following annotation,
```

to avoid gating again the pod in case of a later update:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pod
  annotations:
    keptn.sh/scheduling-gate-removed: "true"
```

> ## Keptn Scheduler for K8s 1.26.0 and lower

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Keptn Scheduler for K8s 1.26 and lower
```

---
title: Keptn integration with Scheduling
linktitle: Scheduler and Scheduling Gates
description: Basic understanding of how Keptn integrates with Kubernetes Pod Scheduling
weight: 80
cascade:
---

Keptn needs to integrate with Kubernetes scheduling to block
the deployment of applications that do not satisfy Keptn defined pre-deployment checks.

On Kubernetes versions older and including 1.26, Keptn uses a Scheduler to block applications deployment.
The **Keptn Scheduler** is an integral component of Keptn that orchestrates
the deployment process.

From Keptn v0.8.4 onward, if you do have a K8s version greater than 1.26,
Keptn
uses

> the [Pod Scheduling Readiness K8s API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-scheduling-readiness).

Reviewer 4: please just talk about the current version and what it does/can do
we will have follow ups for the next version to talk about the default behaviour when it is fully enabled

## Keptn Scheduling Gates for K8s 1.27 and above

When you apply a workload to a K8s cluster, the Mutating Webhook checks for annotations on Pods to
see if it is annotated with

> [Keptn specific annotations](https://main.lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/implementing/integrate/#basic-annotations).

Reviewer 4: please use a relative link here

If the annotations are present, the Webhook adds a gate to the Pod called `keptn-prechecks-gate`,
this is a spec that tells the Kubernetes scheduling framework to wait for Keptn's checks before assigning the pod to a
node.

For instance a pod gated by keptn will look like the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pod
spec:
  schedulingGates:
    - name: "keptn-prechecks-gate"
  ...

> ```

Reviewer 4: please use a file reference :)

The **WorkloadInstance CRD** contains information about the `pre-deployment` checks that
need to be performed before the Pod can be scheduled.
If the `pre-deployment` checks have finished successfully, the WorkloadInstance Controller removes the gate from the
Pod.
The scheduler can then allow the Pod to be scheduled to a node.
If the `pre-deployment` checks have not yet finished, the gate will stay and the Pod will remain pending.
When removing the gate, the WorkloadInstance controller also adds the following annotation, so that if there is an
update of the spec the Pod will not be gated again:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pod
  annotations:
    keptn.sh/scheduling-gate-removed: "true"

> ```

Reviewer 4: please use a yaml file and reference it here

The Keptn Scheduler uses the Kubernetes
[Scheduler Framework](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/) and is based on the
[Scheduler Plugins Repository](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins/tree/master).
Additionally, it registers itself as
a [Permit plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/#permit).

### How does the Keptn Scheduler works

Firstly the Mutating Webhook checks for annotations on Pods to see if it is annotated with
[Keptn specific annotations](../../implementing/integrate/#basic-annotations).
If the annotations are present, the Webhook assigns the **Keptn Scheduler** to the Pod.
This ensures that the Keptn Scheduler only gets Pods that have been annotated for it.

> A Pod `test-pod` modified by the Mutating Webhook will look as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Pod `test-pod` modified by the Mutating Webhook looks as follows:
```

The Keptn Scheduler uses the Kubernetes
[Scheduler Framework](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/) and is based on the
[Scheduler Plugins Repository](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins/tree/master).
Additionally, it registers itself as
a [Permit plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/#permit).

### How does the Keptn Scheduler works

Firstly the Mutating Webhook checks for annotations on Pods to see if it is annotated with
[Keptn specific annotations](https://main.lifecycle.keptn.sh/docs/implementing/integrate/#basic-annotations).
If the annotations are present, the Webhook assigns the **Keptn Scheduler** to the Pod.
This ensures that the Keptn Scheduler only gets Pods that have been annotated for it.
A Pod `test-pod` modified by the Mutating Webhook will look as follows:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: test-pod
spec:
  schedulerName: default-scheduler
  ...

> ```

Reviewer 4: same here

- The status of the pre-deployment checks.
- The deadline for the pre-deployment checks to be completed.
- The Keptn Scheduler checks the status of the `pre-deployment` checks every 10 seconds.

>   If the checks have not finished successfully within 5 minutes, the Keptn Scheduler will not allow the Pod to be
>   scheduled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the checks have not finished successfully within 5 minutes,
the Keptn Scheduler does not allow the Pod to be scheduled.
```

Also the Keptn Scheduler will not schedule Pods to nodes that have failed `pre-deployment`
checks in the past.
This helps to prevent Pods from being scheduled to nodes that are not ready for them.

## Integrating Keptn with your custom scheduler

Keptn scheduling logics are compatible with
the [Scheduler Framework](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/).

> Keptn will not work with a custom scheduler unless it is implemented as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keptn does not work with a custom scheduler unless it is implemented as
```

Also the Keptn Scheduler will not schedule Pods to nodes that have failed `pre-deployment`
checks in the past.
This helps to prevent Pods from being scheduled to nodes that are not ready for them.

## Integrating Keptn with your custom scheduler

> Keptn scheduling logics are compatible with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keptn scheduling logic are compatible with
```

Also the Keptn Scheduler will not schedule Pods to nodes that have failed `pre-deployment`
checks in the past.
This helps to prevent Pods from being scheduled to nodes that are not ready for them.

## Integrating Keptn with your custom scheduler

Keptn scheduling logics are compatible with
the [Scheduler Framework](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/).
Keptn will not work with a custom scheduler unless it is implemented as

> a [scheduler plugins](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/#plugin-configuration).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
a [scheduler plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/scheduling-framework/#plugin-configuration).
```
